\documentclass[draft,grl]{AGUTeX}
%\documentclass[twocolumn,grl]{AGUTeX}
\usepackage{mathptmx}
\usepackage{lineno}
\linenumbers*[1]


%\usepackage[dvips]{graphicx}
\usepackage[pdftex]{graphicx}
\setkeys{Gin}{draft=false}

\authorrunninghead{STYRON AND HETLAND}
\titlerunninghead{LANF EARTHQUAKE LIKELIHOOD}

\authoraddr{Corresponding author: Richard H. Styron,
Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences, University of
Michigan, 2534 CC Little Bldg., 1100 N. University Ave., 
Ann Arbor, MI 48104, USA (richard.h.styron@gmail.com)}

\begin{document}
\title{Estimated likelihood of observing a large earthquake on a continental 
           low-angle normal fault, and implications for low-angle normal fault
       activity}

\authors{Richard H. Styron \altaffilmark{1}
and Eric A. Hetland \altaffilmark{1}}

\altaffiltext{1}{Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.}

\begin{abstract}
The lack of observed continental earthquakes that clearly occurred on low-angle
normal faults (LANFs) may indicate that these structures are not seismically
active, or that these earthquakes are simply rare events. To address this, we
compile all potentially active continental LANFs (twenty-four in total) and
calculate the likelihood of observing a significant earthquake on them over
periods of 1-100 years. This probability depends on several factors including
the frequency-magnitude distribution. For either a characteristic or
Gutenberg-Richter distribution, we calculate a probability of about 0.5 that an
earthquake greater than $M6.5$ (large enough to avoid ambiguity in dip angle)
will be observed on any LANF in a period of 35 years, which is the current
length of the Global CMT catalog. We then use Bayes' Theorem to illustrate how
the absence of observed significant LANF seismicity over the catalog period
moderately decreases the likelihood that the structures generate large
earthquakes.


\end{abstract}

\begin{article}

\section{Introduction}
Low-angle normal faults (LANFs), with dips less than 30$^\circ$, are well
described in the geologic record. They are thought to play an important role in
accommodating large-magnitude continental extension \citep{howard1987crustal}
and crustal thinning \citep{lister1986detachment}, and their recognition has
been a major development in continental tectonics
\citep{wernicke2009detachment}. However, despite widespread field observations
of inactive LANFs and their central role in extensional tectonic theory, they
remain enigmatic and contentious structures, and it is not clear if they are
seismically active at low dip angles in the upper crust. This is for two
reasons: because brittle faulting on LANFs is in apparent conflict with
standard Andersonian rock mechanical theory as typically applied to the upper
crust \citep{axen2004lanfmech}, and because observations of active, seismic
faulting on LANFs are sparse and at times ambiguous. A considerable amount of
research has been performed to address the former concern, reconciling LANF
slip with rock mechanics \citep [e.g.,] []{axenbartley1997,
collettini2011lanfmech}. The latter issue is highlighted by studies that have
searched the focal mechanism catalogs and found no normal faulting earthquakes
with focal mechanisms and surface ruptures clearly indicating slip on planes
$\le30^\circ$ \citep{jackson1987, collettinisibson2001}, which is taken as
conclusive evidence that LANFs are inactive or aseismic. However, as noted by
\citet{wernicke1995seis}, the lack of observed seismic slip on continental
LANFs may be simply because they are structures with comparatively long
recurrence intervals, so earthquakes on them are infrequent. Alternately,
active LANFs may have typical recurrence intervals, but may simply be rare
structures. Without knowing the likelihood of observing an LANF rupture in
a time window of a few decades, it is not clear if an empty search result is
strong evidence against LANF seismicity. If this likelihood is known, though,
Bayesian probability theory provides a framework for quantifying how the
negative search results impact the probability that LANFs are seismogenic.

In this work, we estimate the maximum likelihood of a significant LANF event
occurring in time windows from 1 to 100 years, and then we interpret the lack
of observed LANF seismicity in a quantified, probabilistic context using
Bayes' Theorem. We estimate the maximum observation likelihood by treating
all potentially active LANFs described in the literature as seismically active
at their surface dip angles throughout the upper crust. Under these
assumptions, we create synthetic earthquake catalogs with both
Gutenberg-Richter and `characteristic' frequency--magnitude distributions,
using each fault's geometry and slip rate. We then calculate the probability
of observing earthquakes on at least one LANF over different observation
periods. Finally, we use Bayes' Theorem to incorporate the negative catalog
search results and the observance likelihood to show how the negative results
reduce the probability that LANFs are seismically active, but do not bring the
final probability to zero.


\subsection{LANF Slip, Mohr-Coulomb Failure Theory, and Earthquakes}

Areas of the crust undergoing active extension are generally assumed to have
a subvertical maximum compressive stress. Mohr-Coulomb theory, as applied to
the crust, predicts that a fault with a typical coefficient of friction for
rocks (0.6--0.8) should lock up if it is oriented at an angle greater than
60$^\circ$ to the maximum compressive stress ({\it i.e.}, fault dips less than
30$^\circ$), and new, optimally oriented faults should form \citep{sibson1985}.
Therefore, slip on normal faults with dips less than 30$^\circ$ may require
much lower fault friction, elevated pore fluid pressure, significant local
reorientation of the stress field at depth \citep[e.g.,][]
{yin89,selverstone12}, and/or failure under transtensional stress conditions
\citep{axen1994}.

Seismic evidence for slip on LANFs is sparse. This is partly due to the
ambiguity of the rupture plane in earthquake focal mechanisms, as a focal
mechanism with a low angle nodal plane will also by definition have a high
angle nodal plane. Without ancillary information indicating which nodal plane
corresponds to the slip surface, searches of earthquake catalogs cannot yield
unique results as to whether they contain LANF events. Several collections of
normal fault earthquakes with known surface breaks \citep{jackson1987,
collettinisibson2001}, thereby resolving dip ambiguity, contain no low-angle
events, although we note the total number of events in these collections are
small ($\le$ 25 events). Some candidate LANF events exist, but they are
undersea \citep[e.g.,][]{abers2001} or difficult to verify \citep[e.g.,]
[]{doser1987ancash}. In other cases, microseismicity in active rifts outlines
low-angle detachment faults \citep[e.g.][]{monigle2012}, but this does not
necessarily mean these detachments rupture in large earthquakes.

Geologic evidence for LANF slip is more plentiful. Many potentially active
LANFs have well-defined fault scarps in Quaternary sediments
\citep[e.g.,][]{styron2013slr, kapp2005nqtl, hayman2003dv, axen1999baja}. Some
LANFs display pseudotachylytes \citep[e.g.,][]{listerdavis1989}, indicating
seismic slip; a compelling example is found in the West Salton Detachment,
which is gives strong evidence of seismic slip at low dip angles
\citep{prante2014}.

In the Bayesian context of this study, evidence from geology, seismic
profiling, Mohr-Coulomb failure theory, or any other information aside from
earthquake focal mechanisms is considered to help construct the prior
probability that LANFs rupture in large earthquakes. However, this study does
not attempt to synthesize all available information and arrive at a single
prior (or posterior) probability; to do so would necessarily involve making
contentious decisions that could quickly become obsolete as evidence for or
against LANF seismicity accumulates. Instead, this study illustrates how
\emph{any} prior probability may be quantitatively adjusted based on the
likelihood of observing a significant LANF earthquake over some finite
observation period, and the fact that no such earthquakes have been
definitively identified in the focal mechanism catalogs.

\section{Potentially Active LANFs}

Over the past decade or so, many field studies have found evidence for LANF
activity in orogens throughout the world. These studies typically find arrays
of Quaternary normal fault scarps on the fault traces and/or in the hanging
walls of mapped or inferred low-angle detachment faults \citep [e.g.,]
[]{axen1999baja}. Some studies also have bedrock thermochronology data from the
exhumed detachment footwalls that are suggestive of ongoing rapid exhumation
\citep [e.g.,][]{sundell2013lunggar}, although this data does not preclude
a recent cessation of faulting. In some cases, additional evidence for LANF
activity comes from geophysical data such as GPS geodesy \citep [e.g.,]
[]{hreinsdottir2009altotib} and seismic waves \citep
[e.g.,][]{doser1987ancash}.

We have compiled all potentially active LANFs with known subareal fault traces
from a thorough review of the literature, finding twenty-four total
(Figure~\ref{fig:lanf_map}).  We have mapped the approximate fault traces into
a GIS file (available at https://github.com/cossatot/LANF\_gis), with metadata
such as slip rate and source. Though the fault traces of many LANFs considered
here are obscured by vegetation, others display large fault scarps in
Quaternary sediments, particularly those in Tibet
\citep[e.g.,][]{styron2013slr, kapp2005nqtl} and western North America
\citep[e.g.,][]{axen1999baja, hayman2003dv}, which are commonly interpreted as
evidence for past seismic slip.  About half are in Tibet, consistent with
hypotheses that LANFs and metamorphic core complexes form in areas of hot,
thick crust \citep [e.g.,][]{buck1991mcc}.  The rest are distributed through
other areas of active continental extension: the North American Basin and
Range, the Malay Archipelago, western Turkey, Italy, and Peru. 

Several of the most-commonly cited candidates for seismically active LANFs were
not included because they do not have a clearly-defined, mappable fault trace,
which is necessary for our earthquake likelihood calculations.  These include
the 1995 Aigion, Greece earthquake fault \citep{bernard1997} and other
potential LANFs underneath the Gulf of Corinth, and the 1952 Ancash, Peru
earthquake fault \citep{doser1987ancash}. Though submarine core complexes with
superficially low-angle detachments are well-described in the literature and
some of these structures may have produced recent earthquakes
\citep{abers2001}, we do not include these in our calculations for several
reasons: because mid-ocean ridges have not been structurally mapped with the
completeness or resolution of subareal extensional provinces, it is not
currently possible to come up with a reasonably complete inventory of ocean
LANFs; without high-resolution structural mapping and geodesy of oceanic LANFs,
it is not possible to determine which structures in a mid-ocean ridge segment
are currently active (seismically or not), and it is difficult to confidently
associate particular earthquakes with a specific fault, given the high spatial
density of normal faults at mid-ocean ridges.


\section{Likelihood of observing an LANF event}
\subsection{Earthquake Likelihood on Individual LANFs}

\citet{wernicke1995seis} developed a model, the W95 model, for the relationship
between relative earthquake frequency and dip angle for normal faults, based on
theoretical scaling relationships between mean coseismic stress drop, mean
coseismic fault slip, fault dimensions, and far-field horizontal extension
rates. W95 predicts that low angle faults should rupture much less frequently
than high angle faults, but in much larger earthquakes. We choose not to base
our analysis on W95 as observations over the intervening two decades have shown
that some of the necessary assumptions in the W95 model may be untenable. W95
is reliant upon proportional scaling relationships in which the constant of
proportionality is unknown. The theoretical scaling between stress drop, fault
dimensions and slip used by W95 has been demonstrated to hold only at the order
of magnitude level \citep{leonard2010}, which is too coarse for our study. W95
also assumes that the fault strike length and down-dip distance are
approximately equal, and therefore a function of dip and seismogenic thickness,
which is not supported by the data in the LANF catalog we compiled, in which
dip and strike length are uncorrelated. Finally, fixed velocity boundary
conditions as assumed by W95 may be appropriate in regions of backarc extension
due to slab rollback, for example, but are not were extension occurs in
response to elevated vertical stress from overthickened crust or gravitational
potential excess, such as in western North America \citep{jones1996}, the Andes
\citep{dalmayrac1981}, and Tibet \citep{harrison1992}, where the majority of
active LANFs are found (Figure~\ref{fig:lanf_map}).

We estimate the likelihood of observing a significant earthquake on an
individual LANF over some contiguous time window of length $t$ years (up to
100) based on the estimated slip rate and fault geometry of each LANF. Because
four of the LANFs are estimated  to have slip rates less than 0.2~mm~a$^{-1}$
\citep{usgs_qfaults} and therefore should have an extremely long recurrence
interval for large earthquakes, we do not include these in the calculations. We
perform a Monte Carlo simulation in which we create 4000 synthetic time series
of earthquakes, with unique values for fault geometry and slip rate for each
time series, sampled from the estimated values and uncertainties of each
parameter. Then, for each time series we calculate the fraction of unique time
windows of length $t$ in which an earthquake as large or larger than a given
magnitude occurs. We take this value as the probability of observing an
earthquake greater than or equal to moment magnitude \emph{M} over time period
$t$, which we will refer to in general as $P(M,t)$. All calculations are
performed with Python (v.2.7.5), using the Numpy \citep{oliphant2007numpy},
IPython \citep{perez2007ipython}, Pandas \citep{mckinney-proc-scipy-2010}, and
Joblib Parallel \citep{varoquaux_joblib} packages.  All code and data for this
project is available at
https://github.com/cossatot/lanf\_earthquake\_likelihood/.

The geometry for each fault is estimated based on the length of the fault
trace, the dip of the fault, and the estimated fault locking depth in the area.
The fault is treated as planar for simplicity of calculations. Even though the
exposed footwalls of many detachment faults are non-planar, ample geologic and
geophysical evidence exists for listric \citep[e.g.][]{morley2009}, antilistric
\citep[e.g.][]{styron2013slr, fletcherspelz2009}, and planar
\citep[e.g.][]{mcgrew1993ssrd} detachment geometries at depth; therefore, we
consider treating the fault planes as planar to be the simplest treatment that
is unlikely to systematically bias dip estimates at depth. We determine the
fault length by measuring the approximate length of the mapped fault trace
perpendicular to the assumed extension direction; for faults that change dip
significantly along strike, we only consider the low-angle segments of the
fault. Values for the dip are taken from the literature in most cases, and
measurements of the dip of footwall triangular facets (interpreted as the
exhumed fault plane) from SRTM data otherwise. In all cases, ranges of fault
geometries are considered, encompassing the degree to which the values are
known. The fault locking depth is assumed to be 10 km in the absence of other
evidence (such as a geodetic study, \citep[e.g.,][]{hreinsdottir2009altotib}).

Slip rates of the 20 LANFs are gathered from the literature if possible, or
given broad ranges if not (e.g., 1--10 mm~yr$^{-1}$).  In the Monte Carlo
simulation, samples for slip rate and dip are drawn from uniform distributions
defined by the maximum and minimum values.  Based on field observations, some
faults have dip ranges that go above 30$^\circ$, although for these faults dip
values are sampled from the minimum to 30$^\circ$, as here we only consider
slip on faults shallower than 30$^\circ$. The resulting probabilities on these
faults are then multiplied by the fraction of the dip range that is
$\le30^\circ$.

Each synthetic earthquake sequence is generated by randomly sampling either
50,000 events from a tapered Gutenberg-Richter (GR) distribution with corner
magnitude $M_c = 7.64$ and $\beta = 0.65$ (from values estimated by
\citet{birdkagan2004f_m} for continental rifts), or a 25,000 events from
`characteristic' distribution. It is not certain which distribution more
appropriately describes seismicity on a single LANF, though studies of many
individual fault rupture histories suggests that the characteristic
distribution is more accurate \citep[e.g.,][]{hecker2013eqdist}.  The smaller
number of samples drawn from the characteristic distribution is due to the
increased computation time associated with a higher proportion of large events,
leading to much longer time series for a given number of events.  The samples
are taken from an interval $M = [5.0, \, M_{max}]$, where $M_{max}$ is the
moment magnitude associated with 15 m of slip over the given fault plane.  We
use the standard relations between fault slip, $D$, and moment magnitude, $M$,
given by

\begin{equation}
 M_o = \mu L z D \,/ \, \sin \delta 
 \end{equation}

and

\begin{equation}
M = 2/3 \; \log_{10} (M_o) - 6
\end{equation}
where $L$ is the fault length, $z$ is the seismogenic thickness, $\delta$ is
the fault dip, $\mu = 30$ GPa is the shear modulus, and $M_o$ is the seismic
moment in N m \citep[e.g.,][]{akirichards2002, kagan2003pepi}.  The
characteristic distribution has a large-magnitude mode corresponding to $D$
= 1.5 m on the fault, a typical slip distance for normal fault events
\citep[e.g.][]{wesnousky2008displacement}.  The distributions are shown in
Figure~\ref{fig:fms}.

These calculations rely on two important assumptions that warrant some
discussion. The first is that each earthquake ruptures the entire fault patch
uniformly. Though this is unlikely fault behavior, the long-term statistical
distribution of earthquake recurrence is insensitive to assumptions about slip
distribution in individual events as long as earthquakes are unclustered in
time (the second assumption discussed below).  Specifically, if $n$ different,
equal fault patches rupture independently, each requires $n$ times the
interseismic strain accumulation time to rupture with an earthquake of
magnitude $M$ compared to the accumulation time for a single fault rupturing
uniformly with much lower coseismic slip in each earthquake. Thus, magnitude
$M$ events would happen with the same long-term frequency. The next assumption
is that earthquakes are ordered randomly and separated by the time necessary
for sufficient strain to accumulate for each earthquake to occur.  This means
that foreshock and aftershock sequences and other types of event clustering are
not taken into account.  However, the modal inter-event times for earthquakes
$\ge M \,6$ or so are greater than a hundred years for most LANFs, so the
ordering of events does not impact the results, as this is longer than our
maximum observation window.  Furthermore, any clustering resulting in event
spacing less than the observation window would decrease $P(M,t)$, and here we
choose to calculate the maximum $P(M,t)$ using the simplest assumptions, rather
that choose the model assumptions such that the calculated probabilities are
the minimum.

The results for faults with a GR frequency-magnitude distribution indicate that
it is unlikely that any individual fault would have an earthquake greater than
$M \, 5$ in any observation time window up to 100 years.  As an example, the
results for the Panamint Valley fault are shown in Figure~\ref{fig:pv}a; this
fault has the highest $P(M,t)$ of any of the well-studied LANFs.  The
probability of observing a $\ge M \, 6.0$ event on the Panamint Valley fault is
about 0.5 for $t$ = 100 years, and about 0.15 for $t$ = 35 years, which is the
current length of the Global CMT catalog. As expected given the GR
distribution, $P(M,t)$ is much higher for smaller, more frequent events
than for larger events. The modal recurrence intervals for $M\ge6.5$ events are
in the hundreds of years for 17 of the 20 faults studied; the longer of these
are on the Pumxu--Xainza rift (Tibet) and Dixie Valley fault (Nevada, USA),
which all have very short fault traces (10--20 km) and low slip rates ($\le 1$
mm a$^{-1}$).  

The results for faults with a characteristic frequency-magnitude distribution
yield much lower $P(M,t)$ for small to moderate events, but $P(M,t)$ is higher
for large events(Figure~\ref{fig:pv}b,d); this is because the earthquake
sequences are dominated by large, infrequent events, so the inter-event times
for moderate events are several times greater. For the Panamint Valley fault,
$P(M\ge5,t=35)$ is about 0.07 (versus 0.25 for the GR distribution), but
$P(M\ge 7, t=35)$ is around 0.025 (versus essentially zero for the GR
distribution). As the characteristic distribution likely better represents
earthquakes on an individual large fault, these results suggest that is very
unlikely that we would expect to capture any significant seismicity on an
single LANF in the focal mechanism catalogs. The modal recurrence intervals for
$M\ge6.5$ earthquakes are in general shorter than for the GR distribution, as
more strain release occurs during large events. These recurrence intervals are
shorter than typical normal fault recurrence intervals, but consistent with
faults in rapidly-deforming regions such as the Aegean and New Zealand
\citep{nicol05}; however, these recurrence intervals are much shorter than the
model of \citet{wernicke1995seis}, in which it is argued that LANFs have an
order of magnitude longer recurrence intervals than steeper normal faults.

\subsection{Earthquake Likelihood on All LANFs}
To calculate the probability of observing at least one earthquake on \emph{any}
of these LANFs during a given time period, we first assume that seismicity on
each fault is independent and uncorrelated with seismicity on all other faults.
This assumption is likely true for most faults. It may not be true for the few
proximal faults, though it is unclear how these faults may interact such that
an appropriate joint probability may be calculated. We determine the
probability for each time window and minimum magnitude with the equation
\begin{equation}
P_{AT \, or \, LP\, or\, \ldots \, or \, DV} = 1 - (Q_{AT} \cdot Q_{LP} \cdot \ldots \, \cdot Q_{DV})
\label{ProbUnion}
\end{equation}
where $P_{AT}$ is the probability of observing an earthquake on a single LANF
(e.g., the Alto-Tiberina fault), and $Q_{AT} = 1 - P_{AT}$. Equation
(\ref{ProbUnion}) is the union of probabilities for non-mutually exclusive
random events. 

The results of this calculation are shown in Figure~\ref{fig:all_probs} a and b.
For the Gutenberg-Richter distribution, the likelihood of observing an LANF
earthquake on \emph{any} fault over a given observation period is quite high.
For example, $P(M,t)$ for $M \, \ge 6$ and $t$ = 35 years is about 0.85, and
for the smaller events is quite close to 1.  This high likelihood suggests that
given the model assumptions, we should expect to find such an earthquake in the
focal mechanism catalogs, though because many $M6$ events are not
surface-breaking \citep{hecker2013eqdist}, it might be difficult to
unambiguously determine whether the high- or low-angle nodal plane slipped.
For $M \, \ge 6.5$, the probability of observing an LANF earthquake is about
0.5, and the nodal plane ambiguity should be much less ({\it e.g.}, due to
surface scarps or directivity effects). The results for the characteristic
distribution are lower than the results for the GR distribution for smaller
events and higher for larger events, similar to the patterns seen in results
for individual faults. $P(M\ge5.5,t=35)$ through $P(M\ge6.5,t=35)$ are all
close, about 0.4--0.5.

\subsection{Bayesian adjustments of LANF earthquake likelihood}

Because the earthquake focal mechanism catalog is much shorter than the repeat
time for moderate to large earthquakes on typical normal faults with mm
yr$^{-1}$ slip rates, catalog searches yielding no results for a particular
class of events cannot be definitive evidence that they do not occur.
Nevertheless, the absence of observations does provide some evidence against
their existence. Through Bayes' Theorem, we can use the probability of
observing an event (\emph{i.e.}, $P(M,t)$) to calculate the likelihood that
LANFs are active given the negative outcome of catalog searches. In this
manner, Bayes' Theorem gives an adjusted, posterior likelihood for a given
prior likelihood that LANFs are capable of generating large earthquakes.
Different priors may result from different evidence or assumptions, and are not
likely to be constant through time or among all researchers. We do not choose
a specific prior for LANF activity; rather, we calculate the posteriors over
the range of prior probabilities from 0 (meaning no probability that LANFs are
seismically active) to 1 (meaning LANFs are absolutely seismically active).
Here $P(A)$ represents the prior probability for LANF seismic activity, and
$P(O)$ is the probability of a positive test result (observation of an LANF
earthquake in a catalog search).  The symbol `$\sim$' indicates \emph{not}, so
$P(\sim A)$ is the probability that LANFs are inactive;  $ P(\sim A)
= 1 - P(A)$.  The results of this study give the us the probability of
observing or not observing an LANF event given LANF seismic activity, $P(O|A)$
and $P(\sim O | A) = 1 - P(O|A)$, respectively. $P(O | \sim A)$ is the
probability of observing a `false positive', the incorrect identification of an
LANF event, when in fact LANFs are not active.  The posterior $P(A |\sim O)$ is
the likelihood that LANFs can generate large earthquakes given that no LANF
events have been observed, and through Bayes' Theorem

\begin{equation}
P(A | \sim O) = \frac{P(\sim O|A) P(A)}
{P(\sim O|A)P(A) + P(\sim O|\sim A)P(\sim A)} \;.
\label{BayesRule}
\end{equation}

Figure~\ref{fig:posteriors} shows $P(A|\sim O)$ for $P(A) \in [0,1]$, using
values for $P(O|A)$ of 0.1, 0.5, and 0.8, and a likelihood of false positives
$P(O|\sim A)= 0.01$. The likelihood of LANF seismicity decreases appreciably
given a moderate $P(O|A)$, but does not decrease to zero. Low values of
$P(O|A)$ yield posteriors that are almost unchanged from the priors; in other
words, the fact that no LANF events have occurred does not change the prior
assumptions that LANF events are not expected to occur.  Additionally, for
strong priors with values very close to 0 or 1, the posteriors are much closer
to the priors, which is to say that it takes much more evidence to change
strongly-held positions.  For less strongly-held prior assumptions, the
posterior probability that the LANFs are active is reduced compared to what the
prior assumptions are. For example, in the case of a prior of 0.5 (meaning that
there is a 50\% chance that LANFs can generate large earthquakes), if
$P(O|A)=0.1$, then the posterior likelihood for LANF seismicity drops to
$\approx 0.48$ (Figure~\ref{fig:posteriors}). In this case, the fact that
a catalog search results in no identified LANF earthquake is non-informative.
If $P(O|A)=0.5$, the posterior drops to $\approx 0.34$, a moderate reduction.
On the other hand, if $P(O|A)=0.8$, the posterior is $\approx 0.17$.

\section{Discussion and Conclusions}

Our compilation of all known potentially active LANFs shows that they are
fairly uncommon structures, yet they still may be found in areas currently
undergoing extension. Almost all major continental extensional regions are
represented; notably, narrow, linear continental rifts, such as the East
African and Rio Grande rifts, do not seem to contain active LANFs.  This
compilation may serve as a point of comparison for different characteristics of
active normal faults or LANF geometry, or as a reference for any further
study of these structures.

We regard our calculated $P(M,t)$ values as maximum estimates given our
knowledge of existing active LANFs. As discussed above, part of the reason that
$P(M,t)$ is the maximum is due to the fact that we assume declustered
earthquake catalogs (clustering on either a single fault or between proximal
faults will decrease $P(M,t)$). Additionally, $P(M,t)$ is a maximum estimate as
we assume that all LANFs in this study are seismically active throughout the
upper crust at surface dip angles. It is quite possible that some of these
faults are not tectonically active at all. It is also possible that some or all
of these detachments may be seismically active but at dip angles $\ge30^\circ$
at depth. For example, the Ca\~nada David detachment in Mexico may dip very
steeply at seismogenic depths \citep{fletcherspelz2009}. Some of these may also
be aseismic; the Alto-Tiberina fault appears to be creeping for much of its
down-dip extent \citep{hreinsdottir2009altotib}, and the neighboring Zuccale
inactive LANF has fault gouge suggestive of creep
\citep{collettiniholdsworth2004}. If any individual fault is not seismically
active at low angles, this reduces the total $P(M, t)$ for all events. On the
other hand, it is quite unlikely that all candidate LANFs have been discovered,
and we have not included several known candidates such as submarine detachments
\citep [e.g.,][]{abers2001} or basal detachments without low-angle surface
traces \citep [e.g.,][]{bernard1997} because of the difficulty in quantifying
their occurrence, geometry and slip rates. Therefore, if the rate of inclusion
of additional LANFs (due to discovery or further quantification of geometry and
slip rate of poorly-exposed LANFs) is higher than the rate of discreditation of
LANFs considered here, then $P(M,t)$ values will increase. It should be noted,
though, that the higher the $P(M,t)$, the more unlikely it becomes that LANFs
slip in large earthquakes, as long as one has not been observed.

$P(M \ge  6.5, t = 35) \approx 0.5$ for either frequency-–magnitude
distribution, and is a good reference value as events in this range are likely
to be surface–-breaking, which would resolve the slip plane ambiguity inherent
in earthquake focal mechanisms \citep{hecker2013eqdist}. Given the fact that no
significant LANF earthquakes have been definitively documented, this
probability of an LANF earthquake occurring during a 35 year time window
results in a lowering of any prior assumption that LANFs are active, as long as
that prior assumption is not a strongly-held position. The magnitude of the
decrease depends on the prior likelihood, and the decrease is at most $\sim 15
\%$ (from 0.5 to 0.35). This means that the current catalog length is much too
short to be used as strong evidence against LANF seismicity.  $P(M\ge6.5,
t=100)$ is near 0.8 for both GR and characteristic distributions; this value
more strongly reduces the likelihood of LANF seismicity, yet still does not
yield a definitive negative conclusion.  Therefore, results of studies
analyzing the dip distribution of earthquakes on continental normal faults
\citep{jackson1987, collettinisibson2001} should be interpreted as informative
but not conclusive. Furthermore, alternative mechanisms for LANF slip such as
aseismic creep \citep [e.g.,][] {collettini2011lanfmech,
hreinsdottir2009altotib}, steep dips through most of the seimsogenic zone but
shallower dips near the surface due to isostatic flexure \citep[e.g.,][]
{wernickeaxen1988rolling}, or relatively long seismic recurrence intervals
\citep{wernicke1995seis} need not be invoked to explain the lack of observed
seismicity, though these mechanisms may indeed be valid or well supported by
other observations.



\begin{acknowledgements}
We thank Jon Spencer for a stimulating discussion that became the impetus for
this study. Mike Taylor and Kurt Sundell provided valuable comments on a draft
of the manuscript. Reviews by Gary Axen and Brian Wernicke were insightful
and added clarity to the work.
 
\end{acknowledgements}

% put bib here

\begin{thebibliography}{46}
\providecommand{\natexlab}[1]{#1}
\expandafter\ifx\csname urlstyle\endcsname\relax
  \providecommand{\doi}[1]{doi:\discretionary{}{}{}#1}\else
  \providecommand{\doi}{doi:\discretionary{}{}{}\begingroup
  \urlstyle{rm}\Url}\fi

\bibitem[{\textit{Abers}(2001)}]{abers2001}
Abers, G.~A. (2001), Evidence for seismogenic normal faults at shallow dips in
  continental rifts, \textit{Geological Society, London, Special Publications},
  \textit{187}(1), 305--318.

\bibitem[{\textit{Aki and Richards}(2002)}]{akirichards2002}
Aki, K., and P.~G. Richards (2002), \textit{Quantitative seismology: Theory and
  methods}, University Science Books.

\bibitem[{\textit{Axen}(2004)}]{axen2004lanfmech}
Axen, G.~J. (2004), Mechanics of low-angle normal faults, in \textit{Rheology
  and Deformation of the Lithosphere at Continental Margins}, edited by G.~D.
  Karner et~al., pp. 46--91, Columbia Univ. Press, New York.

\bibitem[{\textit{Axen and Bartley}(1997)}]{axenbartley1997}
Axen, G.~J., and J.~M. Bartley (1997), Field tests of rolling hinges:
  Existence, mechanical types, and implications for extensional tectonics,
  \textit{Journal of Geophysical Research}, \textit{102}(B9), 20,515--20.

\bibitem[{\textit{Axen and Selverstone}(1994)}]{axen1994}
Axen, G.~J., and J.~Selverstone (1994), Stress state and fluid-pressure level
  along the {W}hipple detachment fault, {C}alifornia, \textit{Geology},
  \textit{22}(9), 835--838.

\bibitem[{\textit{Axen et~al.}(1999)\textit{Axen, Fletcher, Cowgill, Murphy,
  Kapp, MacMillan, Ramos-Vel{\'a}zquez, and Aranda-G{\'o}mez}}]{axen1999baja}
Axen, G.~J., J.~M. Fletcher, E.~Cowgill, M.~Murphy, P.~Kapp, I.~MacMillan,
  E.~Ramos-Vel{\'a}zquez, and J.~Aranda-G{\'o}mez (1999), Range-front fault
  scarps of the {Sierra El Mayor}, {Baja California}: {F}ormed above an active
  low-angle normal fault?, \textit{Geology}, \textit{27}(3), 247--250.

\bibitem[{\textit{Bernard et~al.}(1997)\textit{Bernard, Briole, Meyer,
  Lyon-Caen, Gomez, Tiberi, Berge, Cattin, Hatzfeld, Lachet
  et~al.}}]{bernard1997}
Bernard, P., P.~Briole, B.~Meyer, H.~Lyon-Caen, J.-M. Gomez, C.~Tiberi,
  C.~Berge, R.~Cattin, D.~Hatzfeld, C.~Lachet, et~al. (1997), The ms= 6.2, june
  15, 1995 aigion earthquake (greece): evidence for low angle normal faulting
  in the corinth rift, \textit{Journal of Seismology}, \textit{1}(2), 131--150.

\bibitem[{\textit{Bird and Kagan}(2004)}]{birdkagan2004f_m}
Bird, P., and Y.~Y. Kagan (2004), Plate-tectonic analysis of shallow
  seismicity: Apparent boundary width, beta, corner magnitude, coupled
  lithosphere thickness, and coupling in seven tectonic settings,
  \textit{Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America}, \textit{94}(6),
  2380--2399.

\bibitem[{\textit{Buck}(1991)}]{buck1991mcc}
Buck, W.~R. (1991), Modes of continental lithospheric extension,
  \textit{Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth (1978--2012)},
  \textit{96}(B12), 20,161--20,178.

\bibitem[{\textit{Collettini}(2011)}]{collettini2011lanfmech}
Collettini, C. (2011), The mechanical paradox of low-angle normal faults:
  Current understanding and open questions, \textit{Tectonophysics},
  \textit{510}(3), 253--268.

\bibitem[{\textit{Collettini and Holdsworth}(2004)}]{collettiniholdsworth2004}
Collettini, C., and R.~Holdsworth (2004), Fault zone weakening and character of
  slip along low-angle normal faults: insights from the {Z}uccale fault,
  {E}lba, {I}taly, \textit{Journal of the Geological Society}, \textit{161}(6),
  1039--1051.

\bibitem[{\textit{Collettini and Sibson}(2001)}]{collettinisibson2001}
Collettini, C., and R.~H. Sibson (2001), Normal faults, normal friction?,
  \textit{Geology}, \textit{29}(10), 927--930.

\bibitem[{\textit{Dalmayrac and Molnar}(1981)}]{dalmayrac1981}
Dalmayrac, B., and P.~Molnar (1981), Parallel thrust and normal faulting in
  peru and constraints on the state of stress, \textit{Earth and Planetary
  Science Letters}, \textit{55}(3), 473--481.

\bibitem[{\textit{Doser}(1987)}]{doser1987ancash}
Doser, D.~I. (1987), The {A}ncash, {P}eru, earthquake of 1946 november 10:
  Evidence for low-angle normal faulting in the high andes of northern peru,
  \textit{Geophysical Journal of the Royal Astronomical Society},
  \textit{91}(1), 57--71.

\bibitem[{\textit{Fletcher and Spelz}(2009)}]{fletcherspelz2009}
Fletcher, J.~M., and R.~M. Spelz (2009), Patterns of {Q}uaternary deformation
  and rupture propagation associated with an active low-angle normal fault,
  {L}aguna {S}alada, {M}exico: Evidence of a rolling hinge?,
  \textit{Geosphere}, \textit{5}(4), 385--407.

\bibitem[{\textit{Harrison et~al.}(1992)\textit{Harrison, Copeland, Kidd, and
  Yin}}]{harrison1992}
Harrison, T.~M., P.~Copeland, W.~Kidd, and A.~Yin (1992), Raising {Ti}bet,
  \textit{Science}, \textit{255}(5052), 1663--1670.

\bibitem[{\textit{Hayman et~al.}(2003)\textit{Hayman, Knott, Cowan, Nemser, and
  Sarna-Wojcicki}}]{hayman2003dv}
Hayman, N.~W., J.~R. Knott, D.~S. Cowan, E.~Nemser, and A.~M. Sarna-Wojcicki
  (2003), Quaternary low-angle slip on detachment faults in {D}eath {V}alley,
  {C}alifornia, \textit{Geology}, \textit{31}(4), 343--346.

\bibitem[{\textit{Hecker et~al.}(2013)\textit{Hecker, Abrahamson, and
  Wooddell}}]{hecker2013eqdist}
Hecker, S., N.~Abrahamson, and K.~Wooddell (2013), Variability of displacement
  at a point: Implications for earthquake-size distribution and rupture hazard
  on faults, \textit{Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America},
  \textit{103}(2A), 651--674.

\bibitem[{\textit{Howard and John}(1987)}]{howard1987crustal}
Howard, K.~A., and B.~E. John (1987), Crustal extension along a rooted system
  of imbricate low-angle faults: {Colorado River} extensional corridor,
  {California} and {Arizona}, \textit{Geological Society, London, Special
  Publications}, \textit{28}(1), 299--311.

\bibitem[{\textit{Hreinsd{\'o}ttir and
  Bennett}(2009)}]{hreinsdottir2009altotib}
Hreinsd{\'o}ttir, S., and R.~A. Bennett (2009), Active aseismic creep on the
  {Alto Tiberina} low-angle normal fault, {I}taly, \textit{Geology},
  \textit{37}(8), 683--686.

\bibitem[{\textit{Jackson}(1987)}]{jackson1987}
Jackson, J. (1987), Active normal faulting and crustal extension,
  \textit{Geological Society, London, Special Publications}, \textit{28}(1),
  3--17.

\bibitem[{\textit{Jones et~al.}(1996)\textit{Jones, Unruh, and
  Sonder}}]{jones1996}
Jones, C.~H., J.~R. Unruh, and L.~J. Sonder (1996), The role of gravitational
  potential energy in active deformation in the southwestern {U}nited {S}tates,
  \textit{Nature}, \textit{381}, 37--41.

\bibitem[{\textit{Kagan}(2003)}]{kagan2003pepi}
Kagan, Y.~Y. (2003), Accuracy of modern global earthquake catalogs,
  \textit{Physics of the Earth and Planetary Interiors}, \textit{135}(2),
  173--209.

\bibitem[{\textit{Kapp et~al.}(2005)\textit{Kapp, Harrison, Kapp, Grove,
  Lovera, and Lin}}]{kapp2005nqtl}
Kapp, J.~L., T.~M. Harrison, P.~Kapp, M.~Grove, O.~M. Lovera, and D.~Lin
  (2005), Nyainqentanglha {S}han: a window into the tectonic, thermal, and
  geochemical evolution of the {L}hasa block, southern {T}ibet, \textit{Journal
  of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth (1978--2012)}, \textit{110}(B8).

\bibitem[{\textit{Leonard}(2010)}]{leonard2010}
Leonard, M. (2010), Earthquake fault scaling: {S}elf-consistent relating of
  rupture length, width, average displacement, and moment release,
  \textit{Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America}, \textit{100}(5A),
  1971--1988.

\bibitem[{\textit{Lister et~al.}(1986)\textit{Lister, Etheridge, and
  Symonds}}]{lister1986detachment}
Lister, G., M.~Etheridge, and P.~Symonds (1986), Detachment faulting and the
  evolution of passive continental margins, \textit{Geology}, \textit{14}(3),
  246--250.

\bibitem[{\textit{Lister and Davis}(1989)}]{listerdavis1989}
Lister, G.~S., and G.~A. Davis (1989), The origin of metamorphic core complexes
  and detachment faults formed during {T}ertiary continental extension in the
  northern {C}olorado {R}iver region, {U}{S}{A}, \textit{Journal of Structural
  Geology}, \textit{11}(1), 65--94.

\bibitem[{\textit{McGrew}(1993)}]{mcgrew1993ssrd}
McGrew, A.~J. (1993), The origin and evolution of the southern {S}nake {R}ange
  decollement, east central {N}evada, \textit{Tectonics}, \textit{12}(1),
  21--34.

\bibitem[{\textit{McKinney}(2010)}]{mckinney-proc-scipy-2010}
McKinney, W. (2010), Data structures for statistical computing in python, in
  \textit{Proceedings of the 9th Python in Science Conference}, edited by
  S.~van~der Walt and J.~Millman, pp. 51 -- 56.

\bibitem[{\textit{Monigle et~al.}(2012)\textit{Monigle, Nabelek, Braunmiller,
  and Carpenter}}]{monigle2012}
Monigle, P.~W., J.~Nabelek, J.~Braunmiller, and N.~S. Carpenter (2012),
  Evidence for low-angle normal faulting in the pumqu-xianza rift, tibet,
  \textit{Geophysical Journal International}, \textit{190}(3), 1335--1340.

\bibitem[{\textit{Morley}(2009)}]{morley2009}
Morley, C.~K. (2009), Geometry and evolution of low-angle normal faults
  ({L}{A}{N}{F}) within a {C}enozoic high-angle rift system, {T}hailand:
  Implications for sedimentology and the mechanisms of {LANF} development,
  \textit{Tectonics}, \textit{28}(5).

\bibitem[{\textit{Nicol et~al.}(2005)\textit{Nicol, Walsh, Manzocchi, and
  Morewood}}]{nicol05}
Nicol, A., J.~Walsh, T.~Manzocchi, and N.~Morewood (2005), Displacement rates
  and average earthquake recurrence intervals on normal faults, \textit{Journal
  of Structural Geology}, \textit{27}(3), 541--551.

\bibitem[{\textit{Oliphant}(2007)}]{oliphant2007numpy}
Oliphant, T.~E. (2007), Python for scientific computing, \textit{Computing in
  Science \& Engineering}, \textit{9}(3), 10--20.

\bibitem[{\textit{P\'erez and Granger}(2007)}]{perez2007ipython}
P\'erez, F., and B.~E. Granger (2007), {IP}ython: a {S}ystem for {I}nteractive
  {S}cientific {C}omputing, \textit{{C}omput. {S}ci. {E}ng.}, \textit{9}(3),
  21--29.

\bibitem[{\textit{Prante et~al.}(2014)\textit{Prante, Evans, Janecke, and
  Steely}}]{prante2014}
Prante, M.~R., J.~P. Evans, S.~U. Janecke, and A.~Steely (2014), Evidence for
  paleoseismic slip on a continental low-angle normal fault: {T}ectonic
  pseudotachylyte from the {W}est {S}alton detachment fault, {CA}, {U}{S}{A},
  \textit{Earth and Planetary Science Letters}, \textit{387}, 170--183.

\bibitem[{\textit{Selverstone et~al.}(2012)\textit{Selverstone, Axen, and
  Luther}}]{selverstone12}
Selverstone, J., G.~J. Axen, and A.~Luther (2012), Fault localization
  controlled by fluid infiltration into mylonites: {F}ormation and strength of
  low-angle normal faults in the midcrustal brittle-plastic transition,
  \textit{Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth (1978--2012)},
  \textit{117}(B6).

\bibitem[{\textit{Sibson}(1985)}]{sibson1985}
Sibson, R.~H. (1985), A note on fault reactivation, \textit{Journal of
  Structural Geology}, \textit{7}(6), 751--754.

\bibitem[{\textit{Styron et~al.}(2013)\textit{Styron, Taylor, Sundell, Stockli,
  Oalmann, M{\"o}ller, McCallister, Liu, and Ding}}]{styron2013slr}
Styron, R.~H., M.~H. Taylor, K.~E. Sundell, D.~F. Stockli, J.~A. Oalmann,
  A.~M{\"o}ller, A.~T. McCallister, D.~Liu, and L.~Ding (2013), Miocene
  initiation and acceleration of extension in the {S}outh {L}unggar rift,
  western {T}ibet: Evolution of an active detachment system from structural
  mapping and ({U}-{T}h)/{H}e thermochronology, \textit{Tectonics},
  \textit{32}(4), 880--907, \doi{10.1002/tect.20053}.

\bibitem[{\textit{Sundell et~al.}(2013)\textit{Sundell, Taylor, Styron,
  Stockli, Kapp, Hager, Liu, and Ding}}]{sundell2013lunggar}
Sundell, K.~E., M.~H. Taylor, R.~H. Styron, D.~F. Stockli, P.~Kapp, C.~Hager,
  D.~Liu, and L.~Ding (2013), Evidence for constriction and {P}liocene
  acceleration of east-west extension in the {North Lunggar} rift region of
  west central {T}ibet, \textit{Tectonics}, \textit{32}(5), 1454--1479,
  \doi{10.1002/tect.20086}.

\bibitem[{\textit{Survey}()}]{usgs_qfaults}
Survey, U.~G. (), {Q}uaternary fault and fold database for the {U}nited
  {S}tates.

\bibitem[{\textit{Varoquaux and Grisel}(2009)}]{varoquaux_joblib}
Varoquaux, G., and O.~Grisel (2009), {J}oblib: {R}unning {P}ython function as
  pipeline jobs.

\bibitem[{\textit{Wernicke}(1995)}]{wernicke1995seis}
Wernicke, B. (1995), Low-angle normal faults and seismicity: A review,
  \textit{Journal of Geophysical Research}, \textit{100}(B10), 20,159--20.

\bibitem[{\textit{Wernicke}(2009)}]{wernicke2009detachment}
Wernicke, B. (2009), The detachment era (1977--1982) and its role in
  revolutionizing continental tectonics, \textit{Geological Society, London,
  Special Publications}, \textit{321}(1), 1--8.

\bibitem[{\textit{Wernicke and Axen}(1988)}]{wernickeaxen1988rolling}
Wernicke, B., and G.~J. Axen (1988), On the role of isostasy in the evolution
  of normal fault systems, \textit{Geology}, \textit{16}(9), 848--851.

\bibitem[{\textit{Wesnousky}(2008)}]{wesnousky2008displacement}
Wesnousky, S.~G. (2008), Displacement and geometrical characteristics of
  earthquake surface ruptures: Issues and implications for seismic-hazard
  analysis and the process of earthquake rupture, \textit{Bulletin of the
  Seismological Society of America}, \textit{98}(4), 1609--1632,
  \doi{10.1785/0120070111}.

\bibitem[{\textit{Yin}(1989)}]{yin89}
Yin, A. (1989), Origin of regional, rooted low-angle normal faults: {A}
  mechanical model and its tectonic implications, \textit{Tectonics},
  \textit{8}(3), 469--482.

\end{thebibliography}


%\bibliography{styron_hetland_lanf}{}
%\bibliographystyle{agufull08}

\end{article}
%\begin{figure*}%[th]
\begin{figure}
\noindent\includegraphics[width=40pc]{./figures/active_lanfs_map_insets.pdf}
\caption{Map of known, potentially active continental LANFs (blue lines), with
insets showing the physiographic context of the faults.  DXV=Dixie Valley
fault.  PV=Panamint Valley fault.  DV=Death Valley fault.  CD=Ca\~nada David
detachment.  SD=Sevier Desert detachment.  CB=Cordillera Blanca detachment.  
AT=Alto-Tiberina fault.  KZ=Kuzey detachment.  GN=Guney detachment.  
KS=Kongur Shan fault.  LP=Leo Pargil detachment.  GM=Gurla Mandhata 
detachment. NLR=North Lunggar detachment.  SLR=South Lunggar detachment.  
PXN=Pum Qu--Xainza north fault.  PXQ=Pum Qu--Xainza Qingdu fault. 
NQTL=Nyainqentanglha detachment.  PP=Pompangeo detachment.  
TK=Tokorondo detachment.  DD=Dayman Dome.}
\label{fig:lanf_map}
%\end{figure*}
\end{figure}


\begin{figure}[b]
\noindent\includegraphics[width=20pc]{./figures/F-Ms.pdf}
\caption{Gutenberg-Richter and characteristic frequency-magnitude 
                  distributions for the South Lunggar detachment}
\label{fig:fms}
\end{figure}


\begin{figure}
\noindent\includegraphics[width=20pc]{./figures/pv_probs.pdf}
\caption{\textbf{a:} Probabilities of observing an earthquake greater than
or equal to a given moment magnitude \emph{M} over a given observation
window on the Panamint Valley fault, for the Gutenberg-Richter
distribution.  \textbf{b:} Probabilities of observing an earthquake greater
than or equal to a given moment magnitude \emph{M} over a given observation
window on the Panamint Valley fault, for the characteristic distribution.
Note the change in the scale of the y axis.  \textbf{c:} Cross-section
through \textbf{a} at $t$ = 35 years, showing the distributions of $P(M)$.
\textbf{d:} Cross-section through \textbf{b} at $t$ = 35 years, showing the
distributions of $P(M)$.} 
\label{fig:pv} 
\end{figure}


\begin{figure}
%\begin{figure*}
\noindent\includegraphics[width=40pc]{./figures/all_probs_2x2.pdf}
\caption{\textbf{a:} Probabilities of observing an earthquake greater than or
equal to a given moment magnitude \emph{M} over a given observation window on
any LANF, given a Gutenberg-Richter distribution.  \textbf{b:} Probabilities of
observing an earthquake greater than or equal to a given moment magnitude
\emph{M} over a given observation window on any LANF, given a characteristic
distribution.  \textbf{c:} Cross-section through \textbf{a} at $t$ = 35 years
showing probability distributions.  \textbf{d:} Cross-section through
\textbf{b} at $t$ = 35 years showing probability distributions.}
\label{fig:all_probs}
\end{figure}
%\end{figure*}


\begin{figure}
\noindent\includegraphics{./figures/posteriors.pdf}
\caption{Prior likelihood for LANF seismicity $P(A)$ and posterior
 likelihood $P(A|\sim O)$ given no observed earthquakes.  
 $P(O|A)$ is the likelihood of observing an earthquake given activity
 on all LANFs.}
\label{fig:posteriors}
\end{figure}



\end{document}



